---
title: "Math 111, Fall 2023"
coursenum: "Math 111"
section: "2 and 3"
coursename: "Introduction to the Calculus"
permalink: teaching/111-23fall/
startdate: 2023-09
semester: "Fall 2023"
redirect_from:
    - /111/
---

This course concerns the two central idea of calculus: the derivative and the integral.


### Time and location
* Section 2: Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, 10:00-10:50am (room 204)
* Section 3: Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, 11:00-11:50am (room 204)

### Help hours

{% include helphours.md %}

### Handouts and links
* [Syllabus](handouts/syllabus.pdf)
* [Boardwork](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fo/nshvu9eb85zbvh8h90sbb/h?rlkey=qkv7vahdm4dghy8ch90ls2b92&dl=0) from days when I teach from a tablet
* Some comments on [mathematical grammar](handouts/grammar.pdf)
* Notes on [related rates](../math1a/lecture22.pdf) (from an older course; skip the last example)

### Problem Sets
* [Gradescope submission instructions](handouts/gsinfo.pdf) for all assignments.
* There is a **course survey** on Gradescope. Please create a Gradescope account and fill out this survey by Friday 9/8. There is no penalty if it is late, but the survey is very helpful to me in getting to know you.
* [Problem Set 1](psets/pset1.pdf) (due Wednesday 9/13 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 2](psets/pset2.pdf) (due Friday 9/15 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 3](psets/pset3.pdf) (due Wednesday 9/20 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 4](psets/pset4.pdf) (due Friday 9/22 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 5](psets/pset5.pdf) (due Wednesday 9/27 by 10pm)
* (No problem set due Friday 9/29, due to Midterm 1)
* [Problem Set 6](psets/pset6.pdf) (due ~~Wednesday 10/4~~ Thursday 10/5 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 7](psets/pset7.pdf) (due Friday 10/6 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 8](psets/pset8.pdf) (due Friday 10/13 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 9](psets/pset9.pdf) (due Wednesday 10/18 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 10](psets/pset10.pdf) (due Friday 10/20 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 11](psets/pset11.pdf) (due Wednesday 10/25 by 10pm)
* (No problem set due Friday 10/27, due to Midterm 2)
* [Problem Set 12](psets/pset12.pdf) (due Wednesday 11/1 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 13](psets/pset13.pdf) (due Friday 11/3 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 14](psets/pset14.pdf) (due Wednesday 11/8 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 15](psets/pset15.pdf) (due Friday 11/10 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 16](psets/pset16.pdf) (due Wednesday 11/15 by 10pm)
* [Problem Set 17](psets/pset17.pdf) (due Friday 11/17 by 10pm)

### Exams
There will be three midterms and a three hour final exam. Further information and sample exams will be posted here. **Mark the midterm dates on your calendar now.**

* Midterm 1 will be in class on Friday 9/29.
    * You are allowed a **one page notesheet, front and back,** so that you don't need to memorize formulas. Put some time into it -- deciding what to put on the note sheet is a very useful study process!
    * Coverage (tentative -- check for updates closer to exam): Sections 1.1-1.6 (but not 1.7 or 1.8), and 2.1-2.2.
    * Some [review problems](exams/practice1.pdf) / [solutions](exams/sol_practice1.pdf), gratefully borrowed from Rob Benedetto. You may ignore all questions asking about where a graph is discontinuous.
    * [Practice exam](exams/midterm1practice1.pdf) / [Solutions](exams/midterm1practice1soln.pdf)
    * [Exam](https://moodle.amherst.edu/pluginfile.php/1079762/mod_resource/content/1/midterm1compact.pdf) / [Solutions](https://moodle.amherst.edu/pluginfile.php/1079763/mod_resource/content/1/midterm1soln.pdf)

* Midterm 2 will be in class on Friday 10/27.
    * You are allowed a **one page notesheet, front and back,** so that you don't need to memorize formulas. Put some time into it -- deciding what to put on the note sheet is a very useful study process!
    * The exam is not cumulative -- covered material begins with the first topic not covered on Midterm 1.
    * Coverage (tentative -- check for updates closer to exam): Sections 1.8, 2.3-2.5, 2.8, 3.1
   
    * Some [review problems](exams/midterm2review.pdf) / [solutions](exams/midterm2reviewSoln.pdf).
    * Practice exams: [Practice 1](exams/midterm2practice1.pdf) / [Solutions](exams/midterm2practice1soln.pdf), [Practice 2](exams/midterm2practice2.pdf) / [Solutions](exams/midterm2practice2soln.pdf)
    * [Exam](https://moodle.amherst.edu/pluginfile.php/1086425/mod_resource/content/1/midterm2compact.pdf) / [Solutions](https://moodle.amherst.edu/pluginfile.php/1086426/mod_resource/content/1/midterm2soln.pdf)

* Midterm 3 will be in class on Friday 12/1.
    * You are allowed a **one page notesheet, front and back,** so that you don't need to memorize formulas. Put some time into it -- deciding what to put on the note sheet is a very useful study process!
    * The exam is not cumulative -- covered material begins with the first topic not covered on Midterm 2.
    * Coverage (tentative -- check for updates closer to exam): Sections 3.3, 3.4, 3.7, 3.9, 4.1-4.4
    * Practice materials will be posted here later. 


* The final exam date will be on **Thursday, December 21**, from 9am to noon, in SCCE room E110.
     * You are allowed a **one page notesheet, front and back,** so that you don't need to memorize formulas. Put some time into it -- deciding what to put on the note sheet is a very useful study process!
     * The exam will be cumulative, though with increased emphasis on the material not yet covered on the midterms. 
    * New topics since midterm 3 (tentative): Sections 6.2-6.4.
